feat: clarify end-to-end semantics of http status codes (#864) (#869)
zalando/restful-api-guidelines: chapters/http-status-codes-and-errors.adoc

          $ref: 'https://opensource.zalando.com/restful-api-guidelines/models/problem-1.0.1.yaml#/Problem'
----

[#256]

> == {MUST} observe end-to-end semantics of HTTP status codes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== {MUST} preserve the end-to-end semantics of HTTP status codes
```

> When implementing services and middleware (see {RFC-3234}[RFC-3234]), designers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementers of middleware services (see {RFC-3234}[RFC-3234])
```

> and implementers must ensure that the end-to-end semantics of HTTP status codes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
must ensure that the end-to-end semantics of HTTP status codes
```

are preserved (see also {RFC-3439}#section-2.1[RFC-3439 - Section 2.1 - The

> End-to-End Argument and Simplicity]). This means that any intermediate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
End-to-End Argument and Simplicity]). Any intermediate middleware
```

component (e.g., sidecar, proxies, gateways, load balancers etc) must not alter

> the meaning of a status code returned by the service, nor must it return status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the meaning of a status code returned by the application service, nor must it return status
```

> codes that could be interpreted as an authoritative answer on behalf of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
codes that could be interpreted as an authoritative answer on behalf of and
```

> service without clear consent of the service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without clear consent of the application service.
```

> Particular, a middleware must not return a status code {404}, if the service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In particular, a middleware must not return a status code {404}, if the service
```

would have returned a different status code, as this could mislead clients into

> thinking that the resource does not exist when it actually does. Without clear

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thinking that the resource does not exist when it actually does. Without
```

> contract and explicit indication by the service a middleware must always return

Reviewer: ```suggestion
explicit indication by the application service a middleware must always return
```

> a temporary, non-authoritative status code, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a temporary, non-authoritative server-side status code, such as:
```

* **{502} — Bad Gateway**,
* **{503} — Service Unavailable**, or
* **{504} — Gateway Timeout**.

This also applies to coupled middleware components, e.g. sidecars deployed with
the service, whenever they pose the risk of returning misleading status codes

> to clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, a Kubernetes ingress router (like Skipper) must be configured to return status code {503} 
instead of {404} in case no route for the application service endpoint is available.
```

> **Note:** It is important for API designers and consumers to understand that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** It is important for API designers and consumers to rely on
```

> the end-to-end semantics of HTTP status codes is a fundamental part of the API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the end-to-end semantics of HTTP status codes being a fundamental part of the API contract.
```

contract that consumers rely on. Therefore, any middleware that is deployed in
the path of an API must comply with this guideline and must not violate the

> end-to-end semantics of HTTP status codes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is the high risk that status codes mislead API consumers leading to incidents if the middleware does not comply to this guideline and not preserve the end-to-end semantics.
```

Author: I take the liberty to reformulate this sentence.

          $ref: 'https://opensource.zalando.com/restful-api-guidelines/models/problem-1.0.1.yaml#/Problem'
----

[#256]

> == {MUST} preserve end-to-end semantics of HTTP status codes

Reviewer 3: I suggest to downgrade to SHOULD. See comment for more context.

Implementers of middleware services (see {RFC-3234}[RFC-3234]) must ensure
that the end-to-end semantics of HTTP status codes are preserved (see also
{RFC-3439}#section-2.1[RFC-3439 - Section 2.1 - The End-to-End Argument and
Simplicity]). Any intermediate middleware component (e.g., sidecar, proxies,
gateways, load balancers etc) must not alter the meaning of a status code
returned by the application service, nor must it return status codes that
could be interpreted as an authoritative answer on behalf and without clear
consent of the application service.

In particular, a middleware must not return a status code {404}, if the
service would have returned a different status code, as this could mislead

> clients into thinking that the resource does not exist when it actually does.

Reviewer 3: The thing is that this never happens by design, otherwise you'd have a malicious proxy.

I would make a case here for the scenario where a 404 from the proxy cannot be distinguished by a client as to whether it's a (temporary) routing error due to missing routing table or an actual response from the backend. Then say, that catch-all routes can be configured in proxies to return 503 if routes are not found. This way, one ensures that 404s are only returned from the backends, never decided directly by the proxy.

[[client-side-error-codes]]
=== Client side error codes

Clients can safely assume that {4xx} status codes are always authoritative and
comply with the end-to-end principle (see <<256>>). While a middleware is not
can authenticate a request and return {401} or {403} on behalf of the service,
it must never return a misleading status code, e.g. {404} or {410}, if the

> service is not configured or not responding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clients can safely assume that {4xx} status codes are always authoritative and
comply with the end-to-end principle (see <<256>>). While a middleware
can authenticate a request and return {401} or {403} on behalf of the service,
it must never return a misleading status code, e.g. {404} or {410}, if the
service is not configured or not responding.
```

Alternatively, the "is not" phrase needs to be completed and a new one started, but I don't know how.

Reviewer 2: Fun fact: While trying to submit this comment, I got a "not found" response from Github as I was logged in with the enterprise user account. Almost what this paragraph wants to forbid.

[[client-side-error-codes]]
=== Client side error codes

> Clients can safely assume that {4xx} status codes are always authoritative and

Reviewer 3: Due to 3rd party systems being hosted in infrastructure that cannot be influenced by a single client, I would be against advising that one can safely rely on 404. This is only valid in infrastructure that is fully controlled by a single actor.
